# Ch 7: Transactions

Why?
1. hardware may fail
2. application may crash
3. network interruptions
4. Several clients may write
5. partially been updated data reads
6. Race conditions

Interesting items to be discussed:
- concurrency control
- race conditions
- isolations (i.e *read committed, snapshot isolation and serializability.*)

> TXNs make error handling easier for Application

## The slippery concept of a transaction

> There emerged a popular belief that transactions were the antithesis of scalability, and that any large-scale system would have to abandon transactions in order to maintain good performance and high availability [5, 6].
> VS
> On the other hand, transactional guarantees are sometimes presented by database vendors as an essential requirement for “serious applications” with “valuable data”. 
> 
> **Both viewpoints are pure hyperbole.**

### The meaning of ACID

> in practice, one database’s implementation of ACID does not equal another’s implementation
> 	i.e. a lot of ambiguity around the meaning of **isolation**

Half of ACID concepts are non-DB related

#### ACID vs BASE

Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation and Durability.

Basically Available, Soft state and Eventual consistency (some cases of Leaderless Replication is using this?)

#### Atomicity - `abortability` would be a better term

The ability to abort a transaction on error, and have all writes from that transaction
discarded, is the defining feature of ACID atomicity
> It does not
describe what happens if several processes try to access the same data at the same
time, because that is covered under the letter I for isolation
#### Consistency - not really a DB concept

an application-specific notion of the database being in a “good state”.
> i.e. in an accounting system, credits and debits across all accounts must always be balanced.

 this idea of consistency depends on the application’s notion of `invariants`, and it’s the application’s responsibility to define its transactions correctly so that they preserve consistency.

#### Isolation - TXNs appear to be ran serially

Isolation in the sense of ACID means that concurrently executing transactions are
isolated from each other: they cannot step on each others’ toes
> read -> they had run serially

#### Durability - not really a DB concept

data it has written will not be forgotten, even if there is a hardware fault or the database crashes.
> usually also involves a write-ahead log or similar (see “Update-in-place vs. append-only logging”

### Single-object and multi-object operations

Based on above -> we will focus on `Atomicity` and `Isolation` then

#### Single Object Writes

- Atomicity can be implemented using a log for crash recov‐
ery (see “Update-in-place vs. append-only logging” on page 80), 
- isolation can be implemented using a lock on each object (allowing only one thread to access an object at any one time).

Generally  useless, as a transaction is usually understood as a mechanism for grouping multiple operations on multiple objects into one unit of execution.

#### Multi Object Writes

Many distributed datastores have abandoned multi-object transactions because they are difficult to implement across partitions, and they can get in the way in some scenarios where very high availability or performance are required

Used in:
- has a foreign key reference toa row in another table.
- In a document data model,document databases lacking join functionality also encourage denormalization
- secondary indexes

### Handling errors and aborts

> ACID databases are based on this philosophy: if the database is in danger of violating its guarantee of atomicity, isolation or durability, it would rather abandon the transaction entirely than allow it to continue.

BUT
> Not all systems follow that philosophy: especially datastores with leaderless replication 

Popular object-relational mapping (ORM) frameworks such as Rails’ ActiveRecord and Django don’t retry aborted transactions — the error usually results in an exception bubbling up the stack, so any user input is thrown away and the user gets an error message. This is a shame, because the whole point of aborts is to enable safe retries.

> Rails App need to catch DeadLock errors manually and retry 

retrying an aborted transaction is a simple and effective error handling mechanism, it isn’t perfect, example cases:
- network failures
- error is due to overload,
- Only transient errors are worth retrying
- TXN side-effects outside of the database,
- client process fails
## Weak isolation levels

transaction isolation - serializable isolation means that the database guarantees that transactions have the same effect as if they ran serially, i.e. one at a time, without any concurrency.

> Serializable Iso is Not ON by default, as it's expensive for the DB to implement

> “use an ACID database if you’re handling financial data!”, but that misses the point. Even many popular relational database systems (which are usually considered ‘ACID’) use weak isolation, ### Read committed

### Read committed

1. When reading from the database, you will only see data that has been committed (no dirty reads).
2. When writing to the database, you will only overwrite data that has been committed (no dirty writes).
#### No dirty reads

why:
- If a transaction needs to update several objects, a dirty read means that another transaction may see some of the updates but not others.
- If a transaction aborts, any writes it has made need to be rolled back
#### No dirty writes

Why - avoids some kinds of concurrency problems::
- If transactions update multiple objects, dirty writes can lead to a bad outcome. (i.e. Alive won a bit, but Bob gets the invoice)
- read committed does not prevent the race condition between two `counter increments`

#### Implementing read **committed**

databases prevent dirty writes by using row-level locks: when a transaction wants to modify a particular object (row or document), it must first acquire a lock on that object
...
locking is done automatically by databases in read committed mode (or stronger isolation levels).

However, the approach of requiring read locks does not work well in practice, because one long-running write transaction can force many read-only transactions to wait until the long-running transaction has completed. This harms the response time of read-only transactions, and is bad for operability: a slowdown in one part of an application can have a knock-on effect in a completely different part of the application, due to waiting for locks.

Only when the new value is committed, transactions switch over to reading the new value.

### Snapshot isolation and repeatable read

non-repeatable read or read skew - a timing anomaly
some situations cannot tolerate such temporary inconsistency:
- backups
- Analytic queries and integrity checks

Snapshot isolation, also known as multiversion concurrency control (MVCC), is the most common solution to this problem

MVCC maintains several vers of an object side-by-side
#### Implementing snapshot isolation

readers never block writers, and writers never block readers

For snapshot isolation, the database must potentially
keep several different committed versions of an object, because various in-progress
transactions may need to see the state of the database at different points in time.
Hence snapshot isolation is also known as a multiversion technique

#### Visibility rules for observing a consistent snapshot

1. At the start of each transaction, the database makes a list of all the other transactions which are in progress (not yet committed or aborted) at that time. Any writes made by one of those transactions are ignored, even if the transaction sub‐ sequently commits.
2. Any writes made by aborted transactions are ignored.
3. Any writes made by transactions with a later transaction ID (i.e. which started after the current transaction started) are ignored, regardless of whether that transaction has committed.
4. All other writes are visible to the application’s queries.

These rules apply to both creation and deletion of objects

or a long time, continuing to read values which (from other transactions’ point of view) have long been overwritten or deleted.

> PSQL stores txn_id on tuple.
#### Indexes and snapshot isolation

> many implementation details determine the performance of multiversion
concurrency control. For example, PostgreSQL has optimizations for avoiding index
updates if different versions of the same object can fit on the same page

> MySQL -> UNDO log (might impact READ performance)
### Preventing lost updates

### Preventing write skew and phantoms

## Serializability
